Galaxy training for the MFAssignR tool (#5710)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/metabolomics/tutorials/mfassignr/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

> title: Molecular formula assignment and recalibration with MFAssignR package

Author: Resolved in 135497f4f24f9f061e2a65a4c7ed01ec943a95e5

zenodo_link: https://zenodo.org/records/13768009
level: Intermediate
questions:
- What are the main steps of untargeted metabolomics LC-MS data pre-processing?
- How to analyze complex mixture samples using the MFAssignR package?
objectives:
- To learn about the main steps in the pre-processing of untargeted metabolomics LC-MS data.

> - To try hands-on analysis using the real biological data.

Author: Resolved in 135497f4f24f9f061e2a65a4c7ed01ec943a95e5

requirements:
  -

>     type: "internal"

Author: No, thanks for the catch! Resolved in 135497f4f24f9f061e2a65a4c7ed01ec943a95e5

    topic_name: metabolomics
    tutorials:
      - introduction
      - lcms-dataprocessing
time_estimation: 2H
key_points:

> - MFAssignR can be used to process the untargeted LC-MS metabolomics data, including complex environmental mixture samples

Author: Resolved in 135497f4f24f9f061e2a65a4c7ed01ec943a95e5

contributors:
- Kristina Gomoryova
- hechth
- skschum

---

This training covers the multi-element molecular formula (MF) assignment using the MFAssignR tool. It was originally developed by {% cite Schum2020 %} for the analysis of untargeted mass spectrometry data coming from complex environmental mixtures. The package contains several functions including noise assessment, isotope filtering, internal mass recalibration, and formula assignment. 

> **MFAssignR workflow** is composed of several steps:

Author: Resolved in 34c4c574c5314fb2edcf6148655b80c0a75ae1ae

1. Run **KMDNoise()** to determine the noise level for the data.

> 2. Check effectiveness of S/N threshold using **SNplot()**.

Author: Resolved in 34c4c574c5314fb2edcf6148655b80c0a75ae1ae

> 3. Use **IsoFiltR()** to identify potential 13C and 34S isotope masses.

Author: Resolved in 34c4c574c5314fb2edcf6148655b80c0a75ae1ae

> 4. Using the signal-to-noise (S/N) threshold, and the two data frames output from IsoFiltR(), run **MFAssignCHO()** to assign MF with C, H, and O to assess the mass accuracy.

Author: Resolved in 34c4c574c5314fb2edcf6148655b80c0a75ae1ae

> 5. Use **RecalList()** to generate a list of the potential recalibrant series.

Author: Resolved in 34c4c574c5314fb2edcf6148655b80c0a75ae1ae

> 6. Use **FindRecalSeries()** to find the most suitable recalibrant series.

Author: Resolved in 34c4c574c5314fb2edcf6148655b80c0a75ae1ae

> 7. After choosing recalibrant series, use **Recal()** to recalibrate the mass lists.

Author: Resolved in 34c4c574c5314fb2edcf6148655b80c0a75ae1ae

> 8. Assign MF to the recalibrated mass list using **MFAssign()**.

Author: Resolved in 34c4c574c5314fb2edcf6148655b80c0a75ae1ae

9. Check the output plots from MFAssign() to evaluate the quality of the assignments.

We can illustrate the workflow also on the following scheme:
![workflow_graphical](images/mfassignr_scheme.png)

Let's dive now into the individual steps and explain all the inputs, parameter settings, and outputs.

> <agenda-title></agenda-title>
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Data import

At the very beginning, we need to import the dataset we will be using. MFAssignR requires on input a table in a **tabular format**, where:

> - the first column is mass,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the first column is the mass to charge ratio (m/z),
```

Author: Resolved in 34c4c574c5314fb2edcf6148655b80c0a75ae1ae

- the second column is intensity,
- the optional third column is retention time.

> In our case, we will use the model data from the MFAssignR package, which contains the negative ions from acetonitrile extract of wildfire-influenced atmospheric organic aerosol, collected at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. The detection m/z range of the instrument was 100-800 and the ions were analyzed by electrospray ionization on Orbitrap Elite MS and recorded as Xcalibur.raw files. In the MFAssignR package, this dataset is named Raw_Neg_ML in .rds format, which we saved as a tabular file and we will use this file as our input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our case, we will use the model data from the MFAssignR package, which contains the negative ions from acetonitrile extract of wildfire-influenced atmospheric organic aerosol, collected at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). The detection m/z range of the instrument was 100-800 and the ions were analyzed by electrospray ionization (ESI) on Orbitrap Elite MS and recorded as Xcalibur.raw files. In the MFAssignR package, this dataset is named Raw_Neg_ML in .rds format, which we saved as a tabular file and we will use this file as our input.
```

Author: Resolved in 34c4c574c5314fb2edcf6148655b80c0a75ae1ae

>    ```
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_via_link.md %}
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_from_data_library.md %}
>
> 3. Set the format of the dataset to 'tabular'. 
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_change_datatype.md datatype="tabular" %}
>
> 4. We can now view our dataset, and ensure, that it has a correct input format.
>
>
{: .hands_on}

# Noise assessment

Having our input data in the workspace, we can now start with the analysis!

The first step is the noise assessment, which allows us to avoid both false positives (if noise is underestimated) and false negatives (if noise is overestimated). For this purpose, we will be using the **KMDNoise** function, and visualize the result using **SNplot** function. MFAssignR provides an additional function, **HistNoise**, but often the data distribution prerequisites are not fulfilled and especially when the analyte signal tapers into the noise, HistNoise fails to separate the distributions. Therefore, using KMDNoise is strongly preferred.

## KMDNoise

KMDNoise function takes advantage of the calculation of **Kendrick Mass Defect (KMD)**.

> <details-title>Kendrick Mass Defect</details-title>
>

> >**Kendrick mass (KM)** was developed to simplify classification and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>The **Kendrick mass (KM)** serves to simplify classification and
```

>identification of repeating units in molecules, typically 
>homologous CH2 series, which differ only by the number of base 
>units (-CH2 groups in this case). It sets the mass of the molecular fragment to 
>integer value in atomic mass units (amu).
>

> >KM of a compound can be therefore calculated as known m/z of the compound multiplied by ratio (rounded

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>The KM of a compound can be therefore calculated as the known m/z (given the ionization) of the compound multiplied by a ratio (rounded
```

Author: Resolved in 5f0d0d2db6191b9134d8ebe00dc1f4f33ab7eb88

>(CH2_mass)/exact(CH2_mass)), which is (14/14.01565) = 0.9988834.
>
>$$\text{KM} = \text{m/z} \times \frac{\text{14.00000}}{\text{14.01565}}$$
>
>

> >**Kendrick Mass Defect (KMD)** is then defined as the difference 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>The **Kendrick Mass Defect (KMD)** is then defined as the difference 
```

Author: Resolved in 5f0d0d2db6191b9134d8ebe00dc1f4f33ab7eb88

>between rounded KM values and KM.
>$$\text{KMD} = \text{nominal KM} - {\text{KM}}$$
>
>Homologous series, meaning compounds differing only in the number of 
>repeating units (e.g. alkylation series), will always have the same KMD.
>
>{% cite kendrickmass_mzmine %} {% cite kendrickmass_wiki %}
{: .details}

> When the KMD is calculated for all peaks in the mass spectrum, there will be a clear separation of more intense analyte peaks and low-intense noise peaks. To isolate the noise region, we can use the KMD limits of chemically feasible molecular formulas in conjunction with the calculation of the slope of a KMD plot using a linear equation $$y = 0,1132x + b$$, where *y* is the KMD value, *0,1132* was an empirically derived integer, *x* the measured ion mass and *b* an y-intercept. To provide a more accurate assessment, two lines with different y-intercepts are selected (we will set this lower and upper y-limit below). Once the noise region is isolated, a noise level will be estimated as the average intensity of peaks within that region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the KMD is calculated for all peaks in the mass spectrum, there will be a clear separation of more intense analyte peaks and low-intense noise peaks. To isolate the noise region, we can use the KMD limits of chemically feasible molecular formulas in conjunction with the calculation of the slope of a KMD plot using a linear equation $$y = 0.1132x + b$$, where *y* is the KMD value, *0.1132* was an empirically derived integer, *x* the measured ion mass and *b* an y-intercept. To provide a more accurate assessment, two lines with different y-intercepts are selected (we will set this lower and upper y-limit below). Once the noise region is isolated, a noise level will be estimated as the average intensity of peaks within that region.
```

Author: Resolved in 5f0d0d2db6191b9134d8ebe00dc1f4f33ab7eb88

![KMD plot](images/KMDplot_explained.png)

> When running the function, we can stick with the default values: the upper limit for the y-intercept is set to 0.2, so that it does not interact with any potentially double-charged peaks, the lower limit of the y-intercept value is set to 0.05 to ensure no analyte peaks are incorporated into the noise estimation. Both upper and lower x intercept limits are optional and will be set to minimum and maximum mass in the data if not specified. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running the function, we can stick with the default values: the upper limit for the y-intercept is set to 0.2, so that it does not interact with any potentially double-charged peaks, the lower limit of the y-intercept value is set to 0.05 to ensure no analyte peaks are incorporated into the noise estimation. Both upper and lower x-intercept limits are optional and will be set to minimum and maximum mass in the data if not specified. 
```

Author: Resolved in 5f0d0d2db6191b9134d8ebe00dc1f4f33ab7eb88

>
>- {% icon param-file %} *"Input data"*: `mfassignr_input.txt` (Input dataset)
>- {% icon param-file %} *"upper limit for the y intercept"*: `0.2`
>- {% icon param-file %} *"lower limit for the y intercept"*: `0.05`
>   
>
{: .hands_on}

The function outputs a **KMD plot**, where the noise area is separated between red lines and a **noise estimate**. The noise estimate we can then multiply with a multiplier, typically a value between 3 and 10 in order to remove low-intensity m/z values. Multiplication with 10 means we will be very stringent, the signal-to-noise ratio will be high and close to the limit of quantitation (LOQ), whereas multiplication with 3 means the signal-to-noise ratio will be low and we are close to the limit of detection (LOD). The optimal is therefore to start with e.g. 6 and check the results using SNplot, as we will do further.

> <question-title></question-title>
>
> 1. What is the noise level estimated by KMDNoise function?
>
> > <solution-title></solution-title>
> >
> > 1. Using our model data, the estimated noise is **346.0706**.
> >
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

## SNplot

> We can now check the effectiveness of the S/N threshold using SNplot, which plots the mass spectrum with the masses below and above the chosen threshold, where the noise is indicated by red.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now check the effectiveness of the S/N threshold using **SNplot**, which plots the mass spectrum with the masses below and above the chosen threshold, where the noise is indicated by red.
```

Author: Resolved here 9c9a4c312a3d5252230cbbbaf6fa40e3e977c158

The `cut` parameter can be computed as an estimated noise level * multiplier, so if we get 346.0706 as a noise level from KMDnoise, we can multiply it by 6, which gives us 2076.

- `Mass` - parameter defines a centerpoint to look at the mass spectrum.
- `Parameter window.x` - sets the +/- range around the mass centerpoint, default is 0.5.
- `Parameter window.y` - is used for setting the limit of the y-axis in the plot. Parameter window.y multiplied the `cut` parameter value, and the multiplication result is used as the y-axis limit. The default is 10.

> <hands-on-title> Plot the SNplot </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [MFAssignR SNplot](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/recetox/mfassignr_snplot/mfassignr_snplot/1.1.2+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input data"*: `mfassignr_input.txt` (Input dataset)

> >    - *"cut"*: `2076.0`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    - *"sn"*: `6`
>    - *"kmdn"*: `346`
```
this was updated in the version of the SNplot tool used here.

Author: I used the terminology which is kept within the rest of the tutorial, but it means the same:
```
>    - *"SN ratio"*: `6.0`
>    - *"Estimated noise"* `346.0706`
```

Resolved in 9c9a4c312a3d5252230cbbbaf6fa40e3e977c158

2. For specific isotopes, KMD values are calculated using the mass difference between 12C and 13C (1.003355 Da) and the mass difference between 32S and 34S (1.995797 Da).
3. Isotope pairs are further refined using *Resolution Enhanced KMD* adapted from {% cite Zheng2019 %}, in which the Kendrick base is adjusted by an experimentally derived integer (For 34S, the integer is 12 (determined by trial and error) and for 13C the integer is 21 based on {% cite Zheng2019 %}) in order to obtain a desired separation.
4. Finally, abundance ratios are evaluated, where the abundance ratio for 13C should be < 0.6 and the abundance ratio for 34S should be < 0.3.

After performing isotopic filtering, two tables are outputted, one containing the isotopic masses and one containing the monoisotopic masses and all masses that did not have a matching isotopic mass. In complex mixtures, a mass can be classified as both monoisotopic and isotopic; in those cases, it is included in both output tables and classified after the MF assignment.

> We will change only the S/N ratio parameter and Estimated noise (based on the KMDNoise function), otherwise, we can follow with the default settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will change only the S/N ratio parameter and estimated noise (based on the KMDNoise function), otherwise, we can follow with the default settings.
```

Author: Resolved in d979fa38fed9614702c399e01e11f7eeea6e62d0

> <hands-on-title> Isotope filtering using IsoFiltR </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [MFAssignR IsoFiltR](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/recetox/mfassignr_isofiltr/mfassignr_isofiltr/1.1.2+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input Peak Data"*: `mfassignr-input.txt` (Input dataset)
>    - *"SN ratio"*: `6.0`
>    - *"Estimated noise"* `346.0706`
>
>
{: .hands_on}

# Preliminary molecular formula assignment

> Once we have denoised data and have identified the potential 13C and 34S masses, we can start with the preliminary MF assignment, using the **MFAssignCHO** function. This function assigns MF only with C, H, and O elements to assess the mass accuracy, and therefore it's much quicker than the main MFAssign function. It is based on the CHOFIT algorithm developed by {% cite Green2015 %}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we have denoised the data and have identified the potential 13C and 34S masses, we can start with the preliminary MF assignment, using the **MFAssignCHO** function. This function assigns MF only with C, H, and O elements to assess the mass accuracy, and therefore it's much quicker than the main MFAssign function. It is based on the CHOFIT algorithm developed by {% cite Green2015 %}.
```

Author: Resolved in d979fa38fed9614702c399e01e11f7eeea6e62d0

> Firstly, the initial formula assignment with the CHOFIT algorithm is performed along with the quality checks. Then, KMD and z* values are calculated for all masses with the CH2 Kendrick base, and masses are sorted into CH2 homologous series. Subsequently, 1-3 members of each CH2 homologous series below the user-defined threshold are selected and assigned a MF. The ambiguous MFs are returned within the Unassigned list, whereas the unambiguous MF are further re-assigned using CH2, O, H2, H2O, and CH2O extensions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firstly, the initial formula assignment with the CHOFIT algorithm is performed along with the quality checks. Then, KMD and z* values are calculated for all masses with the CH2 Kendrick base, and masses are sorted into CH2 homologous series. Subsequently, 1-3 members of each CH2 homologous series below the user-defined threshold are selected and assigned a MF. The ambiguous MFs are returned within the _Unassigned_ list, whereas the unambiguous MF are further re-assigned using CH2, O, H2, H2O, and CH2O extensions. 
```

Author: Resolved in d979fa38fed9614702c399e01e11f7eeea6e62d0

> Let's use the MFAssignCHO function. On the input, we will need the output of the IsoFiltR function, a data frame of monoisotopic masses, and also (optionally) the data frame containing isotopic masses. Furthermore, we select in which ion mode we measured the data (positive or negative) and we set the signal-to-noise threshold - based on the noise estimate we obtained from the KMDNoise or HistNoise functions multiplied by the multiplier. Finally, based on the acquisition range, we set the lowMW and highMW, and also the allowed ppm error. Other parameters we can leave in default settings, although in the 'Advanced' tab, many additional parameters can be set by user, including amounts of elements, ratios (e.g. minimum allowed O/C ratio) and many others. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's use the MFAssignCHO function. On the input, we will need the output of the IsoFiltR function, a data frame of monoisotopic masses, and also (optionally) the data frame containing isotopic masses. Furthermore, we select in which ion mode we measured the data (positive or negative) and we set the signal-to-noise threshold - based on the noise estimate we obtained from the **KMDNoise** or **HistNoise** functions multiplied by the multiplier. Finally, based on the acquisition range, we set the lowMW and highMW, and also the allowed ppm error. Other parameters we can leave in default settings, although in the 'Advanced' tab, many additional parameters can be set by user, including amounts of elements, ratios (e.g. minimum allowed O/C ratio) and many others. 
```

Author: Resolved in d979fa38fed9614702c399e01e11f7eeea6e62d0

>    - *"ppm_err"*: `3`
>    - *"Ion mode"*: `negative`
>    - *"SN ratio"*: `6`
>    - *"Estimated noise"*: `346.0706`
>    - *"Lower limit of molecular mass to be assigned"*: `50.0`
>    - *"Upper limit of molecular mass to be assigned"*: `1000.0`
>
>
{: .hands_on}

On the output, we get several data frames: unambiguous assignments, ambiguous assignments, and a data frame containing unassigned masses. Additionally, several plots are available, such as MSAssign showing a mass spectrum highlighting assigned and unassigned masses, errorMZ showing the relationship between absolute error (in ppm) and ion mass, van Krevelen plot, and a mass spectrum colored by molecular group.

![errorMZ](images/errorMZ.png)
This plot shows us the absolute error, which increases with the increasing mass as expected. Actually, it is good to see a trend here, meaning there is a systematic error that will be corrected during recalibration, a problem would be if there was a random error that we can't correct.

![Van Krevelen plot](images/vankrevelen.png)

> <details-title>Van Krevelen plot</details-title>

> >Van Krevelen plot was originally introduced in 1950 {% cite krevelen1950graphical %} to illustrate 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>The Van Krevelen plot was originally introduced in 1950 {% cite krevelen1950graphical %} to illustrate 
```

>the coal formation processes. It typically depicts the atomic ratios of hydrogen-to-carbon (H/C) 

> >ratio on y-axis and oxygen-to-carbon (O/C) on x-axis. Certain molecules occupy different regions of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>ratio on the y-axis and oxygen-to-carbon (O/C) on the x-axis. Certain molecules occupy different regions of
```

Author: Resolved in d979fa38fed9614702c399e01e11f7eeea6e62d0

>the van Krevelen plot, e.g. alkanes usually have high H/C and low O/C ratios, aromatic compounds have
>lower H/C ratios and carbohydrates usually have high O/C and moderate H/C ratios.
>
{: .details}

Van Krevelen plot visualizes the chemical composition of complex chemical mixtures and it characterizes the data quality and how the data is distributed. Compounds with similar structures and functional groups will cluster together on the plot.

![MS groups](images/MSgroups.png)

> MSgroups plot shows the abundance distribution of unambiguous assignments. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MSgroups plot shows the abundance distribution of unambiguous molecular formula assignments. 
```

Author: Resolved in d979fa38fed9614702c399e01e11f7eeea6e62d0

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: Molecular formula assignment and mass recalibration with MFAssignR package
zenodo_link: https://zenodo.org/records/13768009
level: Intermediate
questions:
- What are the main steps of untargeted metabolomics LC-MS data pre-processing?
- How to annotate small molecules contained in mass spectrometry analyses of complex mixtures using the MFAssignR package?
objectives:
- To learn about the main steps in the pre-processing of untargeted metabolomics LC-MS data.
- To try hands-on analysis using the real data.
requirements:
    type: "internal"
    topic_name: metabolomics
    tutorials:
      - introduction
      - lcms-dataprocessing
time_estimation: 2H
key_points:
- MFAssignR can be used to process the untargeted LC-MS metabolomics data, including complex environmental mixture samples
- MFAssignR can be used to annotate data obtained from LC-MS experiments with molecular formulas using _in silico_ calculations
- MFAssignR can be used to find a recalibration series and to recalibrate mass spectrometry data to increase the accuracy
contributors:
- Kristina Gomoryova
- hechth

> - skschum

Reviewer 2: (this one is also needed to fix the test error, since the contributor name cannot have a space)

> <agenda-title></agenda-title>
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Data import

At the very beginning, we need to import the dataset we will be using. MFAssignR requires on input a table in a **tabular format**, where:

- the first column is the mass to charge ratio (m/z),
- the second column is intensity,
- the optional third column is retention time.

In our case, we will use the model data from the MFAssignR package, which contains the negative ions from acetonitrile extract of wildfire-influenced atmospheric organic aerosol, collected at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). The detection m/z range of the instrument was 100-800 and the ions were analyzed by electrospray ionization (ESI) on Orbitrap Elite MS and recorded as Xcalibur.raw files. In the MFAssignR package, this dataset is named Raw_Neg_ML in .rds format, which we saved as a tabular file and we will use this file as our input.

> <hands-on-title> Upload data </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial and give it a name.
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/histories_create_new.md %}
>

> > 2. Import the files from [Zenodo]({{ https://zenodo.org/records/13768009 }}):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 2. Import the files from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}):
```

>
>    ```

> >    https://zenodo.org/api/records/13768009/files/mfassignr_input.txt/content

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    https://zenodo.org/records/13768009/files/mfassignr_input.txt
```

## FindRecalSeries

Which are the best series for recalibration? Combined, these series should cover the full mass spectral range to provide the best overall recalibration. The best series to choose are generally long and combined have a "Tall Peak” at least every 100 m/z.

Currently, it is up to the user to choose the most suitable recalibrant series that will be used for the recalibration in the Recal step. It is possible to choose up to 10 series and they should indeed span over the whole range of m/z - often an error is thrown to add more series in case there are gaps, or the chosen series would have a good score but would be way too alike. Therefore, we provide the **FindRecalSeries** function, which attempts to select the best series which fulfill the abovementioned criteria.

We will only provide the `Recalibration series` dataframe from RecalList function, and the best series will be chosen automatically. Although a list of more than 10 series might be provided on the output, only first 10 best series will be used by the Recal function in the next step.

> <hands-on-title> Selecting most suitable series </hands-on-title>
>

> > 1. {% tool [MFAssignR FindRecalSeries](mfassignr_findRecalSeries) %} with the following parameters:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 1. {% tool [MFAssignR FindRecalSeries](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/recetox/mfassignr_findrecalseries/mfassignr_findRecalSeries/1.1.2+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
```
